the second International yoga day
politicians from several opposition
parties in India chose to perhaps put a
strong Defiance against celebrations
that were witnessed across the country
contrary to what happened last year
Delhi chief minister arind krial skipped
the yoga celebrations in Delhi the trend
was followed by almost all political
parties the opposition parties across
the country
the world got together to celebrate
International yoga day in all its
Glory but back home politics managed to
Trump celebrations of India's ancient
[Music]
exercise while Prime Minister Modi lined
up 10 of his top ministers in pole bound
utar Pradesh the opposition retorted by
not attending any of the yoga
events the story wasn't very different
in Bihar either where yoga sessions at
the historic Gandhi Medan went largely
unattended unfortunately none of the
bhar ministers have bothered to come
here we can show you here in this chair
that the Tas yadav has not come Ash CH
the education Minister he has not come T
Pratap yadav the health Minister he has
also not bothered to come here in fact
jdu also was invited here several
spokesperson of jdu they have also not
come here I don't want to make any
political coming today except to say yog
unites does not divide and yoga is
beyond political and ideological divide
I would have been the happiest if the
chief minister of B nitish Kumar would
have been here doing yoga with
[Music]
me opposition leaders across the board
gave the event a miss the question
remains could politics not have taken a
back seat for an event that's now become
a global symbol for
India Bureau report India
Today Priyanka chaturvedi of the
congress party joins me on the broadcast
nikil mandal is the spokesperson of jdu
he joins us from biar samit Patra
represents the BJP and achara pratishta
represents yog welcome I want to start
start with nikil mundel of the jdu Mr
mundel when we saw the visitors gallery
or the guests Gallery in
Patna Bihar Minister skipped the event
Tas yadav not their education Minister
Ashok Chri not their health Minister T
Pratap yadav not there so are we cutting
our nose to spite our face or we have
something against yoga or something
against the BJP government and because
they were a part of the yoga
celebrations that is why used stayed
away good evening to all of you uh first
of all uh let me clear we are not
against
yoga okay we are not against yoga you we
are not against yoga lovers yoga
followers yoga practicers our agenda is
little bit
different if Prime Minister Modi G is so
much concerned about health and yoga our
question is why not
he hello yes go on go on uh why why not
he forget for a once and come along with
uh CM nitish Kumar on the agenda to ban
lior across the country across the India
yoga is
a
okay hello yes okay so you are saying
that ni Kumar will not do yoga or not
participate in a yoga uh event as long
as liquor is not banned across the
country no no no we used to we used to
do yoga but uh but our our question is
different that if Modi G is so much
serious about yoga or health issues why
don't he come along with nitish Kumar on
subject of banning lior across the
country okay uh achar pratia are the two
linked ban liquor or you can't do yoga
see uh gorov G I strongly feel that yog
the word itself means to unite so anyway
why are we dividing ourselves at the
name of yog and yog is an ancient
science which is above all religions
above all parties and I think if
everybody will start following yog as a
lifestyle they will be able to leave the
liquor as well that is a part of yogic
Lifestyle okay so start yoga you may be
able to leave lior says achara pratita
but Priyanka you do yog yourself you
practice yog yourself but not today but
if we were to talk about your party in
pucher the chief minister stayed away
the cabinet minister stayed away from a
function that was held was it because it
was held by Kiran B the left and
governor of the of of the puer ma'am
no no
no okay a couple of things I'd like to
make very clear firstly Mr Narendra Modi
is not yoga bhartia Jan party is not
yoga we are all followers of yog we all
practice yoga but not as for the dictat
of Mr Modi or the btia Jan party the
nobody to certify us whether we are
followers we believe in it or we believe
in the rich cultural heritage of this
country having said that now let me also
tell you something uh the governor of a
state is not it's not her prerogative to
decide on an issue like this or an event
like this it is the chief Minister's
prerogative so the chief minister can
take a call on something like this I'm
very surprised I'm very certain that
youall only went through the pmo India
handle to know which which state
celebrated yoga day which did not
because pmo India handle did not tweet
about Karnataka celebrating
International yoga day today you know we
have reps on we have reporters on
ground I know you might have but somehow
somehow somehow it's not let's talk
about P first please pleas to allow me
to complete allow me to complete so you
know let's talk about I will come to
talk about all the states so I've
already told you I told you puducherry I
will tell you about puducherry now tell
me something in the center you have Pres
president of India rashtrapati ban also
organized a big event on International
yoga day did all the prime ministers and
his Council attend that yoga event or
they organize their own events so
doesn't that become the prime minister's
prerogative as to where he wishes to be
and which event he wants to be a part of
so let's not Club issues here it becomes
the the the chief Minister's prerogative
what he wishes to celebrate what he
doesn't wish to celebrate and let's not
send dictat across just because you wish
to associate everything uh you know even
yoga is now being associated to Mr Modi
which is unfortunate if you have uh
anything BJP send out a dict to
celebrate International yoga day samit
Patra I didn't get I didn't get a
question in the den can you please
repeat the question you know uh Priyanka
chatur said will not accept a dictat
that is sent out by the prime minister
or the government so did the government
or did the Prime Minister send out a
dictat to celebrate the international
yoga day
uh gav you know the answer to this you
it almost appears that the prime
minister or the BJP is trying to user
yoga and make it into a BJP event and
not a national event that's the that's
the complaint I'll answer that I'll
answer that uh let me Begin by saying
that frustration Beyond a point becomes
self-evident and to that effect it
doesn't even deserve a debate or a kind
of answer but still since we are
debating let me put this point what did
Mr Modi do as far as yoga is concerned
after becoming the Prime Minister he
attended the UN session in the UN
session he rightfully mentioned that
yoga is one of the great achievements of
the forefathers of India is one of the
great heritage of India and that the
world should take up to yoga so that we
have better well-being we have better
health Avenues what was wrong in that
the world heard Mr modi's speech the
world decided that well yes if India
brings about a resolution we would think
about it India brought a resolution that
effect that let's have 21st June the
longest day in this year in the year as
the yoga day
no when the government fails to convince
the opposition where will it convince
the where will it convince the world why
is it I mean you know if you're reaching
out to 177 countries across the world
why not to the opposition within the own
within our own
country see I told you g that those who
are frustrated beyond the point can
never be convinced people of the world
people of this country are convinced
that is self-evident Mr gorov if you
would see if you would put out the
pictures of United Nation headquarters
you would see that the whole headquarter
is in fact decorated with the various
postures of yoga across the world Geneva
is celebrating most of the countries are
celebrating 47 Muslim countries are
celebrating in country also and our own
country thousands of places crows of
people are celebrating the yoga Day
celebration so what's the problem if jdu
or the Congress does not understand the
importance of yoga so be it we We Have
Made It non-compulsory event it's not a
compulsory event they can stay back in
home they cannot celebrate yoga if they
wish not to celebrate it but the people
of this country understand the
importance of yoga and we can see a
sense of enthusiasm across the length
and Bre of this country that is what is
required by this
government for this people okay you
heard samit Patra so is this the
congress's frustration that the Congress
chose to stay away because in Karnataka
it did not samit Patra in Karnataka did
not prianka go
on no no I I I do not understand how can
you equate every state cm's decision to
what congress party stances Congress is
very clear we're not against yoga
anything against Mr Modi does not become
let me also ask you Mr Savant you had a
with very a lot of fanfare a separate
Ministry was created Ministry of aush
was created 1,70 CR was allocated to it
last year which was to promote yoga and
to talk about about all non allopathic
ways of promoting Indian medicines they
have left underutilized budget of more
than 50% so when you talk about
promoting yoga I would want to
understand from the government of the
day what have they in true terms done to
ensure that yoga reaches home to home
every single place it creates employment
it creates jobs for people who want to
teach yoga or take yoga as a profession
my second question here is celebrating
it one day of the year and making a big
thing out of it does not mean that
you're promoting the culture of yoga and
having said that talking about
frustration of Congress right from
javahar Lal Neu to our current prime
minister we were all followers of yoga
so we do not need a certificate coming
from a Bara janata party whether we are
frustrated that's a
very aent
point no one SP samit
Patra it's just a spectac in fact the
jdu goes a step ahead the jdu is saying
that this is just very clever marketing
and politicization of yoga by the BJP
samit Patra so two points you to
answer if my question Mr gorov is does I
mean one of the most important Heritage
of India that is Yoga need no marketing
in the global Arena to say that well
this is our heritage and we want the
world to celebrate yoga is there
anything wrong if the prime minister of
the country goes and pronounces the same
on the Das of United Nation I'm
astonished that none of the previous
Prime Ministers including Pandit Neu
about I mean whom the Congress thinks is
the patanjali and probably gave birth to
yoga never made such kind of effort in
the past here is a prime minister who
successfully made an effort and that
transpired into something which we are
seeing as a magnanimous uh celebration
across the globe and why should I be
with I mean why should I be testifying
that it is something which you all are
witnessing I mean uh 3 years ago 4 years
ago did we ever discuss a yoga did we
ever have a debate a single debate about
yoga prime minister
moud discussing something so important
okay the popularity of yoga is rising
worldwide that seems to be the trend or
that seems to be the indication but
within the within our own country many
are not participating now Mr Mandel as
far as the rjd and the jdu are concerned
are you not participating in these
events only because the BJP government
appears to be spearheading it is that
your only
opposition and will you not participate
as long as their opposition as long as
there's no forward movement on liab ban
Nationwide no no I have one question uh
for samit Patra if BJP and PM Modi G is
so much concerned and serious about
health issue then why he has slashed
down Health budget by 17%
who said we have slashed down the hell
budget by 17% and secondly we are
discussing about the yoga celebration as
to why you are abing we not discussing
about the let me ask one question to you
just a second just a second sir since
you asked me a question even I have a
right to ask you a question Mr nitish
Kumar yesterday said no point of
celebrating yoga I want to hear answer
just a second sir yeah just a Mr nitish
Kumar said yesterday that there is no
point in celebrating yoga day until
unless there is a blanket ban on alcohol
cell across the length and bread of the
country and then you and nitish Kumar
themselves maintain that they have been
I mean Mr Kumar himself has been into
yoga since long my question is how was
Mr nitish Kumar practicing yoga because
in the yester years in Bihar alcohol was
not banned alcohol got banned in Bihar
only about 3 or 4 months ago before that
if Mr nitish Kumar was practicing yoga
NBR why was he doing so because
according to he himself yoga cannot be
done in a place where alcohol has not
been banned so these are
all only opposition to Narendra Modi
that your leaders stayed away from the
yoga
event hello yes Mr mandal is it only to
oppose Narendra Modi is it only because
the Prime Minister was spearheading a
yoga movement or is seen as someone
who's PE reading a yoga movement that
nitish Kumar's ministers stayed away
no I have already cleared it we don't
disrespect Yoga Yoga practitioner yoga
follower yoga lovers I already cleared
it
but problem is here many other serious
issues is gone nobody is talking no
problem with ish Jan you have problem
with ramv and Modi no problem with ish
Jan
here we talking about making yoga more
popular but is this as somebody who
practices yoga does this politics over
yoga when you see what's happening
internationally whether it's in New York
you have 135 ambassadors from 135
countries who come and practice yoga
over 10,000 people practice it in
various other places whether it's in
Beijing or in Chile or in Shanghai but
in our own country we see Politics as as
a yoga gur what goes through your mind
uh gav G the most important thing is
when we say that we are relating yoga to
our honorable prime minister yes we are
relating because he is the one who took
this initiative of international yoga
day second thing this is not a national
event it is an International Event and
not in India only like we have got a
Japanese delegation who have come here
to see how we celebrate International
yoga Day in India so I think uh these
things should be seen uh above any
political conflict above any religious
conflict because yog is something as I
always say it is something which India
has given to the entire world and today
when world is actually recognizing India
as a country of yog so we all should be
happy with that rather than uh I mean it
is a it is a good day we should
celebrate it all together you agree with
that
prianka now who is not celebrating yoga
who is not celebrating our country's
Rich heritage who is not celebrating our
country's culture I have a definite
issue with making it a PR gimmick and
not in actual terms do anything about it
I've already mentioned how the budgets
are going underutilized notz and yes
someone mentioned pangali I'm glad
patanjali was mentioned because
patanjali seems to be playing a lot on
bjp's mind these days because any free
land available to the btia janata party
is being handed over to patanjali so one
person benefiting out of it and the rest
not getting the you know benefits of the
budget allocated to a Ministry of aush
is something that bothers me so when we
talk about India's Rich culture Rich
Heritage let it be all encompassing and
let it not be usurped by a political
party just because someone went and made
a speech in the UN and it got declared
as the international yoga day you cannot
take away the importance of yoga you
cannot take away the shared uh history a
shared culture and a shared Rich
Heritage okay so clearly here we see a
lot of division not perhaps as much of
on the issue of yog but politics around
yog I would like to thank all of you for
joining me on this part of our debate
but I want to take you across I want to
take you to the celebrations that were
witnessed across the world today as
people from more than 135 countries came
together and that was just in New York
but people came together to celebrate
yoga it was bigger and better than last
year now 50 CR practitioners from more
than
177 countries rolled out the mats and
participated in the mega event if we
were to talk about New York there was
celebrations in New York from China to
South Korea to Hungary to Australia
United States Britain let's take a look
at what's been happening with
yog and for the moment I also want to
quickly cut off Ross to Rahul chabra
India's ambassador to Hungary he joins
us on the broadcast Ambassador welcome
on the show what were the highlights uh
of the yoga Festival in Hungary because
we hear there was a Ganga
danu celebration together water from the
holy River ganga and water from the danu
take us to details
Ambassador uh thank you so much for
having me to today it's uh really been a
great weekend here in Hungary uh we had
celebrations in 10 cities uh across uh
all in all directions from Budapest
which is right at the center so we start
with the Budapest Central Jail uh we had
some celebrations there and it went on
to the prettiest City in Hungary called
s Andre where our minister of culture
civilization and tourism Dr Mah Sharma
was there with the mayor and amidst the
chanting of Sanskrit Shas uh we had the
mixing of the danub and the ganga Waters
which were then subsequently immersed in
the danu so uh this is just a part uh
the rest of course was over 50 artists
came in from India FL flown in including
padmashri shna Naran G and we had over
60 artists from Hungary who are
proficient in Indian cultural Traditions
so this over 110 artists performed after
the yoga celebrations in the morning in
all these cities we had performances by
these artists we had H we had lack
bangle making we had a food festival so
we had the entire range of uh Indian
cultural activities on display this
whole weekend okay so uh you know ambass
chabra you use this opportunity to
showcase India in a way but are people
genuinely interested in yoga I mean for
them was this just like a one day event
just watching some people practice yoga
oh definitely there is already uh a
considerable interest in yoga here in
Hungary uh there are several yoga
schools here but then that interest just
needs to be sort of further built upon
and that's what we are doing in fact
yoga classes are being run at our
cultural center for the last few months
on a regular basis and uh they are the
most popular classes let me tell you
people and these aren't free classes by
the way uh people actually pay to attend
uh the yoga classes so and that's not
only the classes there are of course
classes in batnam in katak in TAA in
sitar and people are paying ordinary
hung hungarians actually pay to attend
these
classes okay Ambassador many thanks for
joining me uh on the show what does this
indicate the you know while we see some
divisions in our own country we see the
world embracing yoga as a yoga
practitioner how do you react to this
see as a yog practitioner I see it as a
dream coming true of not only mine but
of all those who have given their lives
to yoga because now when the world is
accepting yog with an open heart and
Open Arms it is something which makes me
feel proud I uh personally am working
since 4: in the morning today and right
now I'm coming back from a performance a
classical dance performance whether we
talk about the culture Ministry whether
we talk about the aush ministry
everybody's uh celebrating and the
common people they are celebrating in
every society people are uniting
together they are celebrating so I I
really don't think there is any conflict
on yog and where there is yog there can
never be any conflict okay politics may
happen for other reasons yog may be an
excuse for politics but as aara pratita
was also pointing out yog unites yog
does not divide when we talk about yoga
celebrations Now yoga extremely
important not just for everyday life in
Delhi or Mumbai or anywhere else in the
country especially in high altitude
areas and our image of the day is our
brave brave Soldiers practicing yog in
subzero temperatures at the siin glacier
look at these images this is the Army
yoga is a way of life at the sein
glacier to survive in those high
altitudes against all ODS we leave you
with these images of our
soldiers the brave warriors who guard us
at the High Altitude sein Glacier they
are practicing yoga we leave you with
these images Rahul comes up next stay
with us
la
[Music]